# Setting up Transifex translations

This document describes how to set up and configure translations on Transifex with qgis_plugin_tools.

## Prerequisites

Read [this](./development.md#Translating) for more condensed information and resources on translation.

Install Transifex CLI, qgis-plugin-ci, and check pylupdate5 is in path (works on command line). See the link above for installation information.

## Tutorial

This tutorial describes how to create a new plugin with support for Transifex translations. To begin:

- Start by creating a public repository on GitHub for your translation test project.
- Set up a new test plugin with qgis_plugin tools according to [this](https://github.com/GispoCoding/qgis_plugin_tools#for-new-plugin). 
- Add some `print(tr('Translate this text'))` statements inside the `plugin.Plugin.__init__` method.
- Commit your changes, and push your code to the GitHub repository.

Next, create a Transifex account and a new organization and generate a Transifex access token/key from Transifex settings.
There is no need to create a new project, it will be generated automatically.

Open the settings of your GitHub repository, go to Secrets and create a new *Repository secret*
(**not** an environment secret) called `TRANSIFEX_TOKEN` and give it the value of your Transifex key.

## Configuration

After doing the setup, edit the `.qgis_plugin_ci` file in your plugin (generated by qgis_plugin_tools `creator.py`).

Change `github_organization` to your GitHub username, `project_slug` to your GitHub repository name, `transifex_coordinator`
to your Transifex username, and `transifex_organization` to your Transifex organization name. 

**Note**: If you have issues with pushing to Transifex, verify the organization name by logging in to transifex.com,
open your organization and check the URL. E.g. I created an organization called `test`, but the actual name to use in the URL in my case was `test-1245`!

Finally, verify the repository value in `metadata.txt` points to your GitHub repository. Also check the homepage and tracker values here.

## Pushing and pulling

Now you can push translations to Transifex by running the command `qgis-plugin-ci push-translation <transifex_token>`.

After pushing the translations, go to Transifex and open the new project that is generated automatically. Add a new language to
translate from the languages tab, and then click on Translate to start translating.

After doing some translations, pull the translations manually by running the command
`qgis-plugin-ci pull-translation --compile <transifex_token>`.

You should now have some `.qm` and `.ts` files in your `PluginName/i18n` directory.

## Deploying and testing

### Manual

To see your new translations in action, edit the build.py script and add `i18n` to the `extra_dirs` list.
Also, check the suffix of the files in the `i18n` directory. Add the locale id to the list of locales in `build.py`,
e.g. if there's a `PluginName_fi.ts` file then add `fi` to the list of locales in `build.py`.

Next, deploy the plugin to QGIS by running `python build.py deploy`. Now open QGIS and verify you have the same profile
as defined in `build.py`. Enable the plugin from the QGIS plugins menu, and open the QGIS Python console.
Click on Plugins -> PluginName from the QGIS menu. You should see your print statements in the Python console.

Next, open QGIS settings and change the language to the locale that you have created translations for.
Restart QGIS, open QGIS Python console and open the plugin. The print statements should now be translated.

### Automatic

Move `push_translations.yml` from the docs folder to the `.github/workflows` directory.

Edit `release.yml` from `.github/workflows` and add `--transifex-token ${{ secrets.TRANSIFEX_TOKEN }}` to the last line of
code. Also uncomment the two lines below the comment "Needed if the plugin is using Transifex".

Translations are now pushed to Transifex whenever you push code to the master branch. Translations are automatically
pulled and compiled from Transifex when creating a release. For instructions on creating a release, read
[here](./development.md#creating-a-release).
After creating a release on GitHub (open tags, then the releases tab and create a new release) the release workflow
will run and automatically add a .zip file to the release. Download the zip, install it from the QGIS plugins menu
(Install from zip) and test that the translations are working.
